AABW - Antarctic Bottom Water
Gyres - mixing water in the bottom
Ekman Transport - Coriolis force and ocean currents, westward = positive, northward = positive
Ekman pumping - Wind-driven torque in southern ocean, brings water that sank from northern Antarctic back up towards the surface. 

Sverdrup: Beta remains constant in NH versus SH, but f in Ekman pumping is + in NH and - in SH. 
Remember the Right-hand rule, positive torque = CCW rotation and negative torque = CW rotation around gyres. 

La Nina, colder along the equator and west coast of South America, el Nino is the opposite. 
ITCZ - Intertropic Convergence Zone
Walker Circulation: Trade winds along surface, convection along the west, rising air going back to the east and converging to the ground. Warm water gets pushed from east to west. 
1. Trade winds push war, water westward. 
2. Cold-Warm water contrast strengthens the trade winds
3. East to West circulation as opposed to north to south circulation in hadley cell

El Nino - weakening of normal conditions -> weaker winds push less warm water westward. Convection is pushed eastward. Fires in Indonesia, flooding in Peru. Less chlorophyll, less upwelling. Very dry conditions where there are surface convergence zones from Walker circulation - India and Amazon basin because the dry zones are shifted. 
La Nina - strengthening of normal conditions -> stronger winds push more warm water westward. More rainfall on the eastern side, droughts on the western side. Lots of upwelling. More chlorophyll, more upwelling. 
Get each of them every 3-7 years. 
Peru Anchovy Catches? During el Nino less chlorophyll, less plankton, fish aren't thriving as much and there are some noticeable dips in fishery productivity. 

Hurricanes need tropics, wind growth, and minimal wind shear in order to grow. La Nina conditions are good for hurricanes since El Nino has intensified shear. 

Particle motion with depth z:
Crest of the wave moves in the direction that the wave is propagating. Small quantities of water moves along the waves. Long waves penetrate deeper than short waves. > 4km can reach the bottom of the ocean. Vertical and horizontal scale are tied together. Body surfing?
1. Wavelength
	1. L
	2. length from crest to next trough
2. Water depth
	1. H
Three types of SGW:
c = speed of wave
1. Capillary
	1. L = 1 cm
	2. c ~ $(1/L)^{1/2}$
	3. Greater the L, slower the wave
2. Deep water waves
	1. L << H
	2. c = $(gL/(2pi))^{1/2}$
	3. Greater the L, the faster the wave
3. Shallow water waves
	1. L > H
	2. c = $(gH)^{1/2}$ m/s (speed)
	3. Speed doesn't depend on L
Waves approaching a beach:
1. Slow down (shallow water waves get slower as H decreases)
2. Bunch up
3. Increase in amplitude

Wave buoys:
Float around, track acceleration of water. Throw em  everywhere
Wind waves:
Waves that are forced by the wind. Function of how fast the wind is and how long it has been blowing
Weak winds = calm waters maybe capillary waves
2-5 m/s = larger, normal waves
6-10 m/s = breaking waves
Gale force: 17-24 m/s = warning flags
Hurricane: cat1: 33 m/s & cat5 = 70 m/s

Swell: waves generated by distant storms. 

Waves diffract around an island. Erosion occurs around pointed corners of headland, flatten out the coastline. Irregularities in the coast will slowly be eroded away at. 

Earthquakes can force tsunamis. 

Whether erosion or deposition happens depends on: 
1. Wave intensity
2. Sand grain diameter
As the sand diameter increases, it is harder to transport and more likely to deposit. Fastest speeds result in erosion. 
Sediment tends to go southward along the US coast. East coast, further from the coast is northward. Coastal environments are highly dynamic and tend to change. Onshore-offshore and offshore-onshore shifts. 
Barrier islands result in southward offshore flow of water and sand on the east coast. 

Types of coastlines: 
1. Cliffed coastlines
	1. Name is self explanatory
2. Alluvial/eroding coastline
	1. Erodes easily
	2. Water levels are right where the water begins
3. Eroding coral beaches
4. Depositional coastlines

Average salinity in ocean water: 33-37 ppt. 

Jetties:
Jut outs that interrupts the alongshore flow of sand and increases the amount of sand on the north side of the jetty. 
Harbor jetties and breakwaters keep a channel open & protect the inside from waves. 

Global sea level rise: 3mm/yr